Add post-release blog article about changes to Pod resources API (#42041)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-MM-DD-kubelet-podresources-api-ga.md

Reviewer: /hold

Release comms would need to assign a publication date for this article.

Reviewer 2: @bradmccoydev could we review this publication date? It could be 2023-08-15 like the others ?

Reviewer 3: Can we please put 2023-08-23 as the date on this please @ffromani @SergeyKanzhelev Thanks

Author: fixed, thanks

---
layout: blog

> title: 'Kubernetes v1.28: Kubelet podresources API GA'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'Kubernetes 1.28: Node podresources API Graduates to GA'
```

Author: fixed, thanks!

date: 2023-MM-DD
slug: kubelet-podresources-api-GA
---

**Author:**
Francesco Romani (Red Hat)

> The podresources API is an API served by the kubelet locally on the node, which exposes the compute resources exclusively

Reviewer: Could link to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/ here. I recommend doing that.

Author: Thanks, fixed per your suggestion.

> allocated to containers. In Kubernetes 1.28 the API is now Generally Available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allocated to containers. With the release of Kubernetes 1.28, that API is now Generally Available.
```

Author: thanks, added your suggestion.

## What problem does it solve?

The kubelet can allocate exclusive resources to containers, like
[CPUs, granting exclusive access to full cores](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3570-cpumanager)

> or [memory, either regions or hugepages](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1769-memory-manager).

Reviewer: Consider linking to the docs here, not the KEPs.

Author: ack, on it.

Workloads which require high performance, or low latency (or both) leverage these features.

> The kubelet also can assign [devices to containers](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3573-device-plugin)

Reviewer: Better to link to the docs than the KEP.

Author: Ack, thanks. Fixing.

Collectively, these features which enable exclusive assignments are known as "resource managers".

The podresources API was [initially proposed to enable device monitoring](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/606-compute-device-assignment#motivation).
In order to enable monitoring agents, a key prerequisite is to enable introspection of device assignment, which is performed by the kubelet.

> Serving this purpose was the initial goal of the API. The API was initially extremely simple, with just a single function implemented, `List`,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Serving this purpose was the initial goal of the API. The first iteration of API only had a single function implemented, `List`,
```

Reviewer 4: API is still simple =)

Author: can't argue with this :) changing as you suggest.

to  return information about the assignment of devices to containers.

Without an API like podresources, the only possible option to learn about resource assignment was to read the state files the
resource managers use. While done out of necessity, the problem with this approach is the path and the format of these file are

> both internal implementation details. Albeit very stable, the project reserves the chance to change them freely.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
both internal implementation details. Albeit very stable, the project reserves the right to change them freely.
```

Author: thanks, changed.

Consuming the content of the state files is thus fragile and unsupported, and projects doing this are recommended to consider
moving to podresources API or to other supported APIs.

Since its inception, the podresources API increased its scope to cover other resource managers than device manager.

> In Kubernetes 1.20, the `List` API reports also CPU cores and memory regions (including hugepages); the API also

Reviewer: Is this right?
```suggestion
Added in Kubernetes 1.20, the `List` API function reports also CPU cores and memory regions (including hugepages); the API also
```

Author: The API proper [predates 1.20](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/606-compute-device-assignment/kep.yaml). This information was added in 1.20 and I'm highlighting because it is a noteworthy addition.

Reviewer: If you can rephrase to make it clear that v1.20 added something (a new function? More output from an existing function?), that will help readers.

reports the NUMA locality of the devices, while the locality of CPUs and memory can be inferred from the system.

> In kubernetes 1.21, [the API gained the `GetAllocatableResources` function](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources/README.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes 1.21, the API [gained](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/2403-pod-resources-allocatable-resources/README.md)
the `GetAllocatableResources()` function.
```

Author: thanks, fixed

> This new API complements the existing `List` API and enables monitoring agents to determine the unallocated resources,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This newer API complements the existing `List` API and enables monitoring agents to determine the unallocated resources,
```
Are `List` and `GetAllocatableResources` entire APIs, or are they both part of one interface that exposes more than one bit of functionality?

thus enabling new features built on top of the podresources API like a
[NUMA-aware scheduler plugin](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/scheduler-plugins/blob/master/pkg/noderesourcetopology/README.md).

## Consuming the API

> The podresources API is served by the kubelet over a unix domain socket, exposed by default on `/var/lib/kubelet/pod-resources/kubelet.sock`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Linux, the podresources API is served by the kubelet over a Unix domain socket; the default path
for that socket is `/var/lib/kubelet/pod-resources/kubelet.sock`.
```
What's the story for a Windows node?

Author: Added, thanks for pointing it out. xref: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/115133

In order for the containerized monitoring application consume the API, the socket should be mounted inside the container.
A good practice is to mount the directory, not the socket.

> An example manifest for a hypothetical monitoring agent consuming the podresources API and deployed as daemonset could look like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example manifest for a hypothetical monitoring agent consuming the podresources API and
deployed as a DaemonSet could look like:
```

Author: Thanks, fixed as you suggested.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: DaemonSet
metadata:
  name: podresources-monitoring-app
  namespace: monitoring
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      name: podresources-monitoring
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        name: podresources-monitoring
    spec:
      containers:
      - args:
        - --podresources-socket=unix:///host-podresources/kubelet.sock
        command:
        - /bin/podresources-monitor

>         image: podresources-monitor:latest

Reviewer: Could add a hint about `:latest`, eg:
```suggestion
        image: podresources-monitor:latest # just for an example
```

Author: thanks, added

        resources: {}
        volumeMounts:
        - mountPath: /host-podresources
          name: host-podresources
      serviceAccountName: podresources-monitor
      volumes:
      - hostPath:
          path: /var/lib/kubelet/pod-resources
          type: Directory
        name: host-podresources
```

> Consuming the API programmatically is expected to be straightforward. The kubelet API package provides client code ready

Reviewer: If it's you doing the expecting @ffromani, try:
```suggestion
I hope you find it straightforward to consume the podresources API  programmatically.
The kubelet API package provides client code ready
```

Author: thanks, added your suggestion.

to be consumed. A simple client wrapper, setting default values for timeout and max message size, could look like

> ```

Reviewer: Could mark this as Go.

Author: done, thanks

import (
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"time"

	podresourcesapi "k8s.io/kubelet/pkg/apis/podresources/v1"

> 	"k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/kubelet/apis/podresources"

Reviewer 4: does it have to import `k8s.io/kubernetes`? Is there any staging version for this?

Author: Unfortunately yes, we need to import `k8s.io/kubernetes` or to reimplement all the client. I'll file an issue to improve this.

Author: Filed https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/119817 for tracking purposes

	if err != nil {
		return nil, fmt.Errorf("failed to create podresource client: %w", err)
	}
	log.Printf("Connected to '%q'!", socketPath)
	return podResourceClient, nil
}
```

When operating the containerized monitoring application consuming the podresources API, few points are worth highlighting to prevent "gotcha" moments:

- Even though the API only exposes data, and doesn't allow by design clients to mutate the kubelet state, the gRPC request/response model requires
  read-write access to the podresources API socket. In other words, it is not possible to limit the container mount to `ReadOnly`.
- Multiple clients are allowed to connect to the podresources socket and consume the API, since it is stateless.
- The kubelet has [built-in rate limits](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/116459) to mitigate local Denial of Service attacks from
  misbehaving or malicious consumers. The consumers of the API must tolerate rate limit errors returned by the server. The rate limit is currently
  hardcoded and global, so misbehaving clients can consume all the quota and potentially starve correctly behaving clients.

## Future enhancements

> For historical reasons, the podresources API has a less precise specification with respect to the other kubernetes API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For historical reasons, the podresources API has a less precise specification than typical Kubernetes
APIs (such as the Kubernetes HTTP API, or the container runtime interface).
```

Author: thanks, fixed per your suggestion

This leads to unspecified behavior in corner cases.

> [An effort is ongoing](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/119423) to rectify this state and to have a more precise specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An [effort](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/119423) is ongoing to rectify this state
and to have a more precise specification.
```

Author: thanks, fixed

The [Dynamic Resource Allocation - DRA infrastructure](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3063-dynamic-resource-allocation)
is a major overhaul of the resource management.
[Integration with the podresources API](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/3695-pod-resources-for-dra)
is already ongoing.

## Getting involved

> This feature is driven by the [SIG Node](https://github.com/Kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-node/README.md) community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature is driven by [SIG Node](https://github.com/Kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-node/README.md).
```
“Node special interest group community” isn't quite right, you can omit the _community_ there.

Author: thanks, fixed per your suggestion.

---
layout: blog
title: 'Kubernetes 1.28: Node podresources API Graduates to GA'

> date: 2023-MM-DD

Reviewer 2: Hi @ffromani , here Comm Shadow from 1.28 release, could you please edit for the scheduled publication date? 
```suggestion
date: 2023-08-23
```

Author: thanks, fixed
